
This project consists of several bugfinding tools that look for memory
protection errors in the C source code of the [GNU
R](http://www.r-project.org/) core and packages. **The documentation is
behind the code, the tools do much more than currently described here.**

As input the tools need the LLVM bitcode of the R binary. To check an R
package, the tools also need the bitcode of the shared library of that
package. To get these bitcode files one needs to build R with the CLANG
compiler, with LTO (link time optimizations) enabled but all other compiler
optimizations disabled (-O0), and telling CLANG to emit the LLVM bitcode in
addition to executable files. Detailed instructions (tested on Ubuntu 14.04 and
Fedora Core 20) are available [here](todo). For convenience, the bitcode of
the R binary from R-devel version 67741 generated by CLANG/LLVM 4.2.0 is
included in the `examples` directory.

The tools need [LLVM 3.5.0](http://llvm.org/releases/download.html) to build
(one can download one of the Clang [pre-built
binaries](http://llvm.org/releases/download.html#3.5.0)).  To build the
tools, one just needs to modify the LLVM installation path in `src/Makefile`
and run `make`.

## Detecting Allocating Functions

The key to the correct use of the `PROTECT` macros is knowing which
functions may allocate and thus trigger garbage collection.  Except for few
obvious cases this is hard to find out.

The `csfpcheck` tool does the job automatically:

`csfpcheck src/main/R.bin.bc >lines`

produces a list of source files with line numbers where allocation may
happen. This script puts a comment at the end of each such line:

`cat lines | while read F L ; do echo "sed -i '$L,$L"'s/$/ \/* GC *\//g'\'" $F" ; done | bash`

The tool errs on the safe side, which is saying that a function may
allocate.  It may be that in fact the function won't allocate for the given
inputs.  The tool, however, takes some function arguments into account: e.g. 
it can detect that `getAttrib(,R_ClassSymbol)` will not allocate, but
`getAttrib(,R_NamesSymbol)` might.  In the following snippet from `eval.c`,

```
SEXP attribute_hidden do_enablejit(SEXP call, SEXP op, SEXP args, SEXP rho)
{
    int old = R_jit_enabled, new;
    checkArity(op, args);
    new = asInteger(CAR(args)); /* GC */
    if (new > 0)
        loadCompilerNamespace(); /* GC */
    R_jit_enabled = new;
    return ScalarInteger(old); /* GC */
}
```

`ScalarInteger` indeed allocates and it would be obvious to any developer,
`loadCompilerNamespace` really allocates but perhaps it is less obvious, and
the detected allocation in `asInteger` is surprising.  But it is correct! 
The function will allocate when displaying a warning, e.g.  when the
conversion loses accuracy or produces NAs.

A patch for the R-devel version 67741 with the generated "GC" comments by
the tool is available in the `examples` directory for convenience. To get
the annotated sources, one just needs to

```
cd examples
svn checkout -r 67741 http://svn.r-project.org/R/trunk
cd trunk
zcat ../csfpcheck.67741.patch.gz | patch -p0
```

Having such annotated sources may be useful when manually looking for
protection bugs or when checking the reports of other bug finding tools, and
perhaps also when diagnosing erros found by [runtime
checking](http://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-exts.html#Checking-memory-access)
(valgrind, gctorture, the barrier, etc).

## Detecting Multiple-Allocating-Arguments Bugs

The `maacheck` tools for a very special but common bug pattern, like here:

```
PROTECT( expr = lang5(install("gsub"), ScalarLogical(1), pattern, replacement, x) );
```

I've learned about these bugs from Radford Neal who fixed a number of them
manually in [pqR](http://www.pqr-project.org/) and I've ported those fixes
to R-devel.  In the example above, `ScalarLogical` indeed allocates and
returns the allocated object.  `install` may also allocate and return the
allocated object, but it would also protect it implicitly by putting it into the symbol
table.  The `lang5` function is callee-protect, it protects its arguments. 
If `ScalarLogical` is executed before `install`, `install` may allocate and
kill the object allocated by `ScalarLogical`.  In C, the order of execution
of `install` and `ScalarLogical` is undefined, so this can happen.

The tool looks for similar errors, not necessarily only those including
`install`, even though such are most common. To check the `RGtk2` package
from CRAN, run

```
maacheck src/main/R.bin.bc RGtk2.Rcheck/00_pkg_src/RGtk2/src/RGtk2.so.bc
```

This will produce a number of suspected errors, including

```
WARNING Suspicious call (two or more unprotected arguments) to retByVal at S_pango_layout_get_size RGtk2.Rcheck/00_pkg_src/RGtk2/src/pangoFuncs.c:3596
```

This is a real error:

```
_result = retByVal(_result, "width", asRInteger(width), "height", asRInteger(height), NULL);
```

`asRInteger` is just an alias for `ScalarInteger`, so if the call to
`asRInteger` that executes second allocates, it will kill the object
allocated by the previous call to `asRInteger`.

The `maacheck` by design can have false alarms. It looks for multiple
allocating expressions passed to a function, where at least one of the
expressions may return a newly allocated object.  The tool, however, does
not detect if a function implicitlly protects an object before returning it
(e.g.  `install` or `getPrimitive` are such functions).  The `install` calls
are built-in exceptions in the tool.  Experience with the tool so far
suggests that it has very few false alarms in practice (and much less than
the following tools).  It should be said that running the tools on recent
versions of the R core is not a good way to assess the rate of false alarms,
because we're fixing the errors as we find them.

`ueacheck` is a more general variant of `maacheck`. It looks also for
errors where some of the allocating expressions is given as local variable:

```
SEXP pa = allocVector(INTSXP, 1);
INTEGER(pa)[0] = ci->pid;
setAttrib(rv, install("pid"), pa);
```

In the example, `install` may allocate and kill the object pointed to from
`pa`, allocated earlier by `allocVector`.  The tool is internally based on a
number of heuristics and has more false alarms than `maacheck` (but can also
detect more errors).  A typical example of a false alarm with this tool is
implicit protection, such as linking a newly allocated object to an object
already protected: the tool does not detect this an may think the newly
allocated object is still ``fresh''.

## Detecting Error Functions

Non-local returns (`setjmp`/`longjmp`) are used in R to handle errors. It is
a good practice to annotate functions that never return normally (that is
via the `return` statement or through reaching the end of a `void`
function).  The annotation helps the compiler generate better (faster) code
and more precise warnings.  In R, such functions are annotated using
`NORETURN` macro, but this macro is sometimes forgotten.  The `errcheck`
tool detects functions that should be marked `NORETURN` but are not, as well
as functions that are marked but shouldn't (yet I didn't find such case). 
E.g. checking CRAN package `mets`:

```
errcheck src/main/R.bin.bc mets.Rcheck/00_pkg_src/mets/src/mets.so.bc
```

reports also

```
UNMARKED error function void arma::arma_stop<std::string>(std::string const&) RcppArmadillo/include/armadillo:94
```

this is a correct report, this function should be marked `NORETURN`.

This tool should be precise by design.  The tool is a byproduct of the
detection of error functions that had to be implemented for the memory
checking tools: error paths often include allocation (at least allocating
the error message), and they can easily be the only allocation a function
does.  So, by design, all error functions (and error paths within a
function) have been excluded from the checking for memory errors.

## Detecting Protection Stack Imbalance

A function has pointer protection stack imbalance if the pointer protection
stack depth at function exit is not the same as at function entry. This is
sometimes the correct/intended behavior (e.g.  in generated parsers), but
commonly it is an error. Pointer protection imbalance is sometimes checked
and reported at runtime, but with the `bcheck` tool, one can detect it also
in rarely executed branches (and without tests with a good coverage):

```
PROTECT(sa = coerceVector(CAR(args), CPLXSXP));
PROTECT(sb = coerceVector(CADR(args), CPLXSXP));
na = XLENGTH(sa); nb = XLENGTH(sb);
if ((na == 0) || (nb == 0)) return(allocVector(CPLXSXP, 0));
```

In the example above, if the then-branch is taken, the the pointers added to
the pointer protection stack just above will remain there after the function
exits.  It is a common pattern of such errors - one forgets that an
(exceptional) function return also has to release pointers from the
protection stack, or releases the wrong number of such pointers.  The tool
can handle different versions of the protect calls, a single protection
counter per function (commonly named ``nprotect''), certain kinds of loops,
saving and restoring the pointer protection stack explicitly, and also some
forms of conditionals (e.g.  ``if (nprotect) UNPROTECT(nprotect)'').  There
are still some false alarms and bailouts for code that is still too
complicated, and indeed there are not-useful reports for functions that have
protection stack imbalance by design.

To check the CRAN BMN package, run

```
bcheck ./src/main/R.bin.bc BMN.Rcheck/00_pkg_src/BMN/src/BMN.so.bc
```

the report also includes

```
Function runJTAlgSecMomVec
  has negative depth BMN.Rcheck/00_pkg_src/BMN/src/JTAlgWrapper.cc:152
  has possible protection stack imbalance BMN.Rcheck/00_pkg_src/BMN/src/JTAlgWrapper.cc:153

```

The reported function is shown below

```
SEXP runJTAlgSecMomVec(SEXP adjMat, SEXP thetaMat, SEXP varR, SEXP maxRuntime)
{
    // protect the items
    PROTECT(adjMat);
    PROTECT(thetaMat);
    PROTECT(varR);
     
    int size = INTEGER(GET_DIM(adjMat))[0];
    int var = INTEGER(varR)[0];
    time_t quittingTime = time(NULL) + INTEGER(maxRuntime)[0];

     
    // get space for the expectation and covariance matrix
    SEXP covVec, expec;
    PROTECT(covVec = allocVector(REALSXP, size));
    PROTECT(expec = allocVector(REALSXP, size));

    double *covVecPtr = REAL(covVec);
    double *expecPtr = REAL(expec);

    // get the probgraph object
    try
    {
        ProbGraph graph(size, INTEGER(adjMat), REAL(thetaMat), quittingTime);
        graph.getExpectSecMomSingleVar(var,expecPtr, covVecPtr);
    }
    catch(char const* errorMsg)
    {
        error(errorMsg);
    }
     
    // generate a list for the return values
    SEXP retList, dimnames;
    PROTECT(retList = allocVector(VECSXP,2));
    SET_VECTOR_ELT(retList,0,expec);
    SET_VECTOR_ELT(retList,1,covVec);
    PROTECT(dimnames = allocVector(STRSXP,2));
    SET_STRING_ELT(dimnames, 0, mkChar("Expectation"));
    SET_STRING_ELT(dimnames, 1, mkChar("SecondMomentVector"));
    setAttrib(retList,R_NamesSymbol, dimnames); 

    // unprotect them again
    UNPROTECT(8);    // <========================= line 152
    return(retList); // <========================= line 153
}

It is easy to see that the tool is right, only 7 pointers have been
protected, but 8 are being unprotected.  Currently the `bcheck` tool also
checks for unprotected pointers at calls (described below). Even though
these two kinds of bugs are unrelated, the underlying working of the tool is
the same (interpreting the guards, conditions, etc).
